# EDUMATH

[Paper]() | [Models and Datasets](https://huggingface.co/collections/bryanchrist/edumath-68e5185eabcef5e598ca2b90) 

This codebase is based off the paper EDUMATH: Generating Standards-aligned Educational Math Word Problems, and includes code for interacting with the EDUMATH models and STEM dataset as well as code for all experiments reported in the paper. 

# Overview 
Math word problems (MWPs) are critical K-12 educational tools, and customizing them to students' interests and ability levels can increase learning outcomes. However, teachers struggle to find time to customize MWPs for each student given large class sizes and increasing burnout. We propose that LLMs can support math education by generating MWPs customized to student interests and math education standards. To this end, we use a joint human expert-LLM judge approach to evaluate over 11,000 MWPs generated by open and closed LLMs and develop the first teacher-annotated dataset for standards-aligned educational MWP generation. We show the value of our data by using it to train a 12B open model that matches the performance of larger and more capable open models. We also use our teacher-annotated data to train a text classifier that enables a 30B open LLM to outperform existing closed baselines without any training. Next, we show our models' MWPs are more similar to human-written MWPs than those from existing models. We conclude by conducting the first study of customized LLM-generated MWPs with grade school students, finding they perform similarly on our models' MWPs relative to human-written MWPs but consistently prefer our customized MWPs.

# License and Intended Use
Our datasets, model and code are released under the GNU GPLv3 license. EDUMATH 12B falls under the Gemma 3 license and EDUMATH 30B falls under the Qwen 3 license.

# Getting Started
After installing PyTorch (follow instructions [here](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/)), to install the dependencies for this codebase, you can run: 
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

# Loading EDUMATH Models
You can load EDUMATH 12B and the EDUMATH classifier by running the following code (note to use EDUMATH 12B, you will need to use the classifier to filter its outputs to only those with a score of 0): 
```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer, 
import torch

model_path = "bryanchrist/EDUMATH_12b"   # Specify the path to the model
classifier_path = "bryanchrist/EDUMATH_classifier" #Specify the path to the classifier
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("google/gemma-3-12b-it") # Load tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_path, device_map="auto", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16) #Load Model
classifier_tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("answerdotai/ModernBERT-large") # Load classifier tokenizer
classifier = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(classifier_path, device_map="auto", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16) # Load classifier
```
Loading EDUMATH 30B just requires loading Qwen 3 30B and then loading the EDUMATH classifier to filter model outputs using the same approach as EDUMATH 12B:
```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoTokenizer, 
import torch
classifier_path = "bryanchrist/EDUMATH_classifier" #Specify the path to the classifier
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507") # Load tokenizer
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507", device_map="auto", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16) # Load Model
classifier_tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("answerdotai/ModernBERT-large") # Load classifier tokenizer
classifier = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(classifier_path, device_map="auto", torch_dtype=torch.bfloat16) # Load classifier
```
# Loading STEM and the Human Annotation Data 
You can load our datasets using the following code: 
```python
from datasets import load_dataset
stem = load_dataset('bryanchrist/STEM')
annotations = load_dataset('bryanchrist/EDUMATH_annotations')
```
*Note: You will need to create a train/test split if you wish to have a validation sample. 

# Generating Data with EDUMATH Models
To generate a dataset with the EDUMATH models or any other model reported in our paper (except the GPT models), you will need to run the generate.py script. The script will automatically save model samples to a CSV file. Here is an example of how to run the script with EDUMATH 12B:
```
python generate.py --model bryanchrist/EDUMATH_12b --tokenizer google/gemma-3-12b-it --output_file edumath_samples
```
To automatically filter model outputs using the EDUMATH classifier (required when using EDUMATH 12B or EDUMATH 30B), run annotate.py specifying the full path to your model samples. Here is an example if you were to use the classifier on the CSV file outputted by generate.py above:
```
python annotate.py --input_file data/edumath_samples.csv --output_file data/edumath_samples_classified.csv --classifier_annotate
```
# Annotating Data with Gemma 3 27B IT
To automatically annotate model outputs with Gemma 3 27B IT as reported in the paper, run annotate.py on your dataset (requires data in a CSV format as created by running generate.py). Here is an example if you were to annotate the CSV file outputted by generate.py above:
```
python annotate.py --input_file data/edumath_samples.csv --output_file data/edumath_samples_annotated.csv --llm_annotate
```
# Training EDUMATH 12B and EDUMATH Classifier
To train EDUMATH 12B, you first need to run sft.py followed by kto.py. To train the EDUMATH classifier, you need to run train_classifier.py.

# Citation
```bash

```